WIP ARO-13667 hypershift: support disabling image registry via capability (#1729)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/hypershift/support-disabling-image-registry-via-capability.md

## Proposal

`HostedCluster` grows an optional slice field `disabledCapabilities` in its
`spec`, indicating what components users want to disable at install time.

Initially, the only supported value in this slice is `ImageRegistry`.

Editing this field at runtime is only allowed if the user is removing
capabilities from the slice. Adding capabilities to the slice is not supported.
In other words, disabling capabilities at runtime is not supported.

The `control-plane-operator` is responsible for reconciling both, the Image
Registry and Cluster Version Operator. Both reconcilers will need to change.

The Image Registry reconciler needs to look for an entry matching the
`ImageRegistry` capability in the `HostedCluster.spec.disabledCapabilities`
field, and skip reconciliation when the `ImageRegistry` capability is found.

The `CVO` reconciler needs to edit the `ClusterVersion` resource, setting
`spec.capabilities.baselineCapabilitySet` to `"None"`, then calculating the
difference between `ClusterVersionCapabilitySets[ClusterVersionCapabilitySetCurrent]`
and `HostedCluster.spec.disabledCapabilities`, assigning the resulting set to

> field `spec.capabilities.additionalEnabledCapabilities`.

Reviewer: it's not clear to me why the installer's `baremetal` logic wouldn't apply to HyperShift.  Does HyperShift not run on `baremetal`?  Or does it run on `baremetal` but somehow allow the `baremetal` component to be disabled?  I wonder what things like bring-your-own-nodes workflows might look like on HyperShift, but I could see some future where folks want just the Kube API and don't need the `MachineAPI` (or some future `ClusterAPI`?) component enabled, to tell the HostedControlPlane controller that it can skip the Cluster-API Machine(Set), etc. reconcilers.

> field `spec.capabilities.additionalEnabledCapabilities`.

Reviewer 2: @wking what's the impact when we run a Hypershift control plane with enabled capabilities baremetal?

> field `spec.capabilities.additionalEnabledCapabilities`.

Author: > [...] the installer has a dedicated (non-API based) validation we might need to replicate:

Added a section about this under "Risks and Mitigations": https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1729/files#diff-36fbf863a674d8de905f7aa65cdb6158ec8c27b70d2fe5eed4272ca0a964a730R278-R289

the ones specified in `DisabledCapabilities`.
This function currently doesn't have access to the `HostedClusterSpec`.
`cvo.ReconcileDeployment` will need to change to allow it access to the set of
disabled capabilities specified by the customer.

TODO: all the reconcile functions in `hostedcontrolplane_controller.go` take a
`HostedControlPlane` object, not a `HostedCluster`. My assumption is that the
`HosterControlPlane` gets created from the `HostedCluster`. If this is correct,
where does it happen?

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Hypershift is the target topology of this enhancement.

When the cluster service consumer creates a hosted cluster with the `ImageRegistry`
capability disabled, the hosted control plane of the hosted cluster will not
have the image registry running.

When the cluster service consumer reenables the `ImageRegistry` capability on a
running cluster, the CVO will provision the resources for the cluster-image-registry-operator,
resulting in new pods in the management cluster. Additionally, the pull secrets
controller (currently located in the openshift-controller-manager) will also be

> enabled by Hypershift, causing a pod redeployment.

Reviewer 2: I think this is not necessary to be included in this section

Author: Do you think there's a better section for this info? Maybe `Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints`? 🤔

Reviewer 2: that's certainly a good fit for Implementation Details

#### Standalone Clusters

Standalone clusters already support capabilities - the changes in this
enhancement do not affect this topology.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

The changes in this enhancement target Hypershift specific API and CLI.
Single-node deployments and Microshift are unnaffected.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

With a capabilities framework in place, it's expected that more capabilities
become available for disabling at install time.

Currently in OpenShift Standalone all optional capabilities are enabled by default.
In the future, that might change and some optional capabilities might come
disabled by default.

In that case, cluster service consumers might need a way to decide which

> of the disalbed optional capabilities they want to reenable at cluster install

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the disabled optional capabilities they want to re-enable at cluster install
```

hosted control plane may differ from another. This may introduce support
challenges (?).

Managed services must implement support for the new `DisabledCapabilities` field
in their own tooling before cluster service consumers can use them. Because of
this, behavior may drift among different implementations, such as ARO and ROSA.

### Drawbacks

TBD

The idea is to find the best form of an argument why this enhancement should
_not_ be implemented.

What trade-offs (technical/efficiency cost, user experience, flexibility,
supportability, etc) must be made in order to implement this? What are the reasons
we might not want to undertake this proposal, and how do we overcome them?

Does this proposal implement a behavior that's new/unique/novel? Is it poorly
aligned with existing user expectations?  Will it be a significant maintenance
burden?  Is it likely to be superceded by something else in the near future?

## Open Questions [optional]

This is where to call out areas of the design that require closure before deciding
to implement the design.  For instance,
 > 1. This requires exposing previously private resources which contain sensitive
  information.  Can we do this?

> ## Test Plan

Reviewer 2: my list on e2e tests so far would be:
* TestCreateCluster [1] with image reg disabled
* TestCreateClusterV2 [2] with image reg disabled
* TestUpgradeControlPlane [3] with image reg disabled

the assertions they have are sufficient, we would just need to ensure the image registry operator is not showing up in the status objects after setting the capabilities 

[1] https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/blob/main/test/e2e/create_cluster_test.go#L1111
[2] https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/blob/main/test/e2e/create_cluster_test.go#L1165C6-L1165C25
[3] https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/blob/main/test/e2e/control_plane_upgrade_test.go#L16

Reviewer 2: then we would need another integration (?) test to check the disable -> enable path is not allowed

Author: Thanks for this! I'll update this section. 

> then we would need another integration (?) test to check the disable -> enable path is not allowed

disable -> enable path is allowed, it's the opposite that cannot be done, i.e disabling an already enabled capability is not possible. But yes we do need a new test/assertion for that specifically.

---
title: support-disabling-image-registry-via-capability
authors:
  - flavianmissi
reviewers: # Include a comment about what domain expertise a reviewer is expected to bring and what area of the enhancement you expect them to focus on. For example: - "@networkguru, for networking aspects, please look at IP bootstrapping aspect"
  - deads2k
  - jubittajohn
  - sanchezl
  - sjenning
  - tjungblu

>   - tjungblu

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

  - deads2k
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - deads2k
  - sjenning
creation-date: 2024-12-19
last-updated: yyyy-mm-dd
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/XCMSTRAT-771
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md"
---

# Disable the Image Registry via Capability

## Summary

In OCP Classic it's possible to disable various optional components at install
time via [cluster capabilities](cluster-capabilities). This enhancement proposes
introducing a capabilities API to Hypershift, with initial support for a single
capability for disabling the `ImageRegistry`.

> [cluster-capabilities]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/installing/overview/cluster-capabilities.html

Reviewer: nit: in this enhancement context, you might want a local link, like `[cluster capabilities](/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md)`, because that will have more technical/design context than the admin-facing docs.  You have that already in `see-also`, but I'm not sure what additional context the version-pinned admin docs are adding.

It is currently possible to disable the Image Registry by setting
`.spec.managementState` to `Removed` in the `configs.imageregistry.operator.openshift.io`
resource. Using this approach to disable the Image Registry has the undesired
side-effect of causing a pod redeployment in the hosted control plane. This is
because the pull-secrets controller must be disabled along with the Image
Registry, and for that a pod redeployment is necessary.

We propose a way to disable the Image Registry that conforms to
[Hypershift's design principles][hypershift-design-principles].

Introducing a capabilities API to Hypershift is the natural way of supporting
disabling optional components at install time. To constrain the scope of the
inital implementation, the `ImageRegistry` capability is the only one that will
be initially supported, although the capabilities API itself will allow room for
growth.

[hypershift-design-principles]: https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/reference/goals-and-design-invariants/

### User Stories

See [Hypershift docs][hypershift-personas] for a definition of the personas used below.

* As a cluster service consumer, I want to provision hosted control planes and

> clusters without the Image Registry, so that my hosted clusters do not contain

Author: I really do mean the component here, not the capability. Is there anything else I can do to improve clarity here? 🤔

resources from a component I do not use, such as workloads, storage accounts,
pull-secrets, etc
* As a cluster service provider, I want users to be able to disable the Image
Registry so that I don't need to maintain hosted control plane components that

> users don't care about.

Reviewer: the first is saving the customer money, by reducing CPU/memory consumption for components they don't want.  The second is saving Red Hat money, by reducing the amount of things we are involved in (and on the hook to debug) on the compute nodes.

> users don't care about.

Author: I attempted to make the distinction more clear, and also brought in the personas definition from Hypershift docs.

[hypershift-personas]: https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/reference/concepts-and-personas/#personas

### Goals

* Cluster instance admins can create clusters with the Image Registry disabled
* Cluster instance admins can re-enable the Image Registry without recreating
the cluster
* Components in the hosted control plane are not impacted by the Image Registry
absence
* Image Registry related assets such as workloads, storage account and

> pull-secrets are not provisioned in clusters without the Image Registry

Author: I agree about being more clear about component vs capability, thanks for pointing that out. In some of your suggestions I did mean to refer to the component though, so I incorporated it partially. PTAL.

`.spec.disabledCapabilities` to `["ImageRegistry"]` as requested by the user
1. Hypershift control-plane-operator detects the ImageRegistry capability is
disabled in the `HostedCluster`, and skips creating resources for the Image
Registry operator, ensuring the `ClusterVersion` resource reflects this
1. The guest cluster becomes available and functional without the image registry
1. The hosted control-plane becomes available and functional without the
cluster image registry operator running
1. Image Registry operator and operand resources are not present in guest or
management clusters
1. Image Registry infrastructure resources are not created in cloud provider
(i.e. storage bucket, IAM user, etc)
1. No pull-secrets are created for any service accounts, regardless of when
the service account is created (install time or runtime)

### API Extensions

```go
import "github.com/openshift/api/config/v1"

// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=ImageRegistry
type OptionalCapability v1.ClusterVersionCapability

const ImageRegistryCapability OptionalCapability = v1.ClusterVersionCapabilityImageRegistry

type HostedClusterSpec struct {
    // ... existing fields ...

>     // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="size(self.spec.disabledCapabilities) <= size(oldSelf.spec.disabledCapabilities)",message="Disabling capabilities on running clusters is not supported, only removing capabilities from disabledCapabilities (re-enabling capabilities) is supported."

Reviewer: I'm not particularly expressive in `XValidation:rule`, but "size got smaller" is leaning hard on "the only allowed value is `ImageRegistry`" to ensure the new value is a subset of the old.  E.g. if a future enum allows both `ImageRegistry` and `NewCap`, this rule would allow someone to replace `disabledCapabilities: ["ImageRegistry"]` with `disabledCapabilities: ["NewCap"]`, when we'd like that blocked (because we [can't disable the previously-enabled][1] `NewCap`).  So this is fine for now, but will probably need refining if we ever expand the enum.  And since we think expanding the enum is likely, if anyone has ideas about how we could be more explicitly checking for subset-ness, we could pivot this rule now too.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/1a49f30d20031fc428e0452a09242be4843dec34/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md#capabilities-cannot-be-uninstalled

Reviewer 2: I think we're adding those business rules into the cluster-service as the entry point, no need to handle this on the hosted cluster spec

Author: Ah, yes that was a bit optimistic of me wasn't it 😅 
I'm not an expert either. After some research I couldn't find a way to check if a list is a subset of another using CEL. [This](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apiextensions-apiserver/pkg/apiserver/schema/cel/library#Lists) is what I found on list operations, so not much. 

> I think we're adding those business rules into the cluster-service as the entry point, no need to handle this on the hosted cluster spec

Do users need to go through the clusters-service API to edit the `HostedCluster` object of a running cluster?

Reviewer 2: as per their architecture documentation [1], yes.

[1] https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1aM_CRkC2NL-aTDv7wQRjatv8EXoacV7vdcOCPo_9sr8/edit#slide=id.g2f160991407_0_7

Reviewer: Managed Hosted ROSA customers, and eventually Hosted ARO customers too, will not have direct access to HostedCluster.  But I thought we also ship HyperShift [via the multi-cluster engine operator][1] and in that case we do expect customers to directly manipulate HostedCluster `spec` (e.g. see [these HostedCluster update docs][2]).

In the cluster-version operator, we don't enforce our cannot-be-uninstalled constraint via `XValidation:rule` though, and we don't punt that to higher-level components who we hope will prevent cluster admins from asking for unsupported things.  Instead, we read in the `spec` (which has some non-exhaustive `XValidation:rule` guardrails), and then provision for things like [the `CapabilitiesImplicitlyEnabled` condition][3] where we can say things like "you know that thing you're asking for?  We're not doing it entirely that way, because...".  Perhaps you could do something like that in the HostedCluster and HostedControlPlane controllers?

[1]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/hosted_control_planes/hcp-prepare/hcp-requirements.html#hcp-matrix-hc_hcp-requirements
[2]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/hosted_control_planes/hcp-updating.html#hcp-get-ocp-channel_hcp-updating
[3]: https://github.com/openshift/cluster-version-operator/pull/754/commits/3a30caf7f18c931669550ba175fcd05f2f00da08#diff-db97dc5ae62ef3b4c4dabfdc43cbc3ae0ceae9b58748cadebde679e32b5bec2bR369-R383

Author: I agree Trevor, a condition is the way to go here. I've added a section mentioning this down below: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1729/files#diff-36fbf863a674d8de905f7aa65cdb6158ec8c27b70d2fe5eed4272ca0a964a730R238-R243

Author: I removed the CEL validation - we're going with conditions to help communicate more complicated validation rules, so I figure we don't need half-arsed rules here.

`HosterControlPlane` gets created from the `HostedCluster`. If this is correct,
where does it happen?

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Hypershift is the target topology of this enhancement.

#### Standalone Clusters

Standalone clusters already support capabilities - the changes in this
enhancement do not affect this topology.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

The changes in this enhancement target Hypershift specific API and CLI.
Single-node deployments and Microshift are unnaffected.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### Evolving the Hypershift capabilities API

With a capabilities framework in place, it's expected that more capabilities
become available for disabling at install time. Currently in OpenShift
Standalone all optional capabilities are enabled by default. In the future, that
might change and some optional capabilities might come disabled by default.

In that case, cluster service consumers might need a way to decide which
of the disabled optional capabilities they want to re-enable at cluster install
time. In this case, a `--enabled-capability` flag may be added to the Hypershift

> CLI, and an equivalent `EnbaledCapabilities` added to the `HostedCluster`

Reviewer: nit: `EnbaledCapabilities` -> `EnabledCapabilities`

this, behavior may drift among different implementations, such as ARO and ROSA.

### Drawbacks

TBD

The idea is to find the best form of an argument why this enhancement should
_not_ be implemented.

What trade-offs (technical/efficiency cost, user experience, flexibility,
supportability, etc) must be made in order to implement this? What are the reasons
we might not want to undertake this proposal, and how do we overcome them?

Does this proposal implement a behavior that's new/unique/novel? Is it poorly
aligned with existing user expectations?  Will it be a significant maintenance
burden?  Is it likely to be superceded by something else in the near future?

## Open Questions [optional]

1. What happens when a new capability is added to `ClusterVersionCapabilitySetCurrent`?
Hypershift will set `additionalEnabledCapabilities` in the `ClusterVersion`
resource to `ClusterVersionCapabilitySetCurrent` at install time. After an
upgrade, the set of current capabilities might change.
Should Hypershift reconcile the changes? And if so, what happens then?
1. Does Hypershift's CVO need to support [implicity capabilities][implicit-capabilities]?

> [implicit-capabilities]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md#updates

Reviewer 3: Let me start by saying that I didn't know about `ImplicitlyEnabledCapabilities` until just now, but I think the ramifications are this:

Capabilities cannot be disabled once enabled.  That we already know.  The effect is that if a user creates a cluster with the registry enabled or enables it after initially disabling it at install time, that cluster is locked to having the image registry enabled forever.  The only possible toggle is from disabled -> enabled and it is a one-way trip.

`ImplicitlyEnabledCapabilities` is for converting more components into capabilities over time.

For example, in the y-release before image registry became a capability, `ClusterVersionCapabilitySet4_13`, `ImageRegistry` would not have been in the enabled capabilities set because it didn't exist yet.  But once you upgraded to the y-stream where it was a capability, CV `spec.capabilities` would still be `ClusterVersionCapabilitySet4_13` but CVO will set `ImplicitlyEnabledCapabilities=True` reflecting that `ImageRegistry` was not in the `spec.capabilities` but is still enabled because it was present pre-upgrade.

All that being said, I don't think we have to worry about this from an hypershift API perspective because we are not exposing the capabilities API directly on the HostedCluster resource.  As long as the HostedCluster API reflects the limitations of the underlying capabilities API (i.e. that enabling is a one-way trip and disabling can only happen a cluster creation time) we should be fine.  We can let the CVO deal with the `ImplicitlyEnabledCapabilities` and because we don't support any OCP versions before the `ImageRegistry` capabilities was created, we don't have to worry about the situation above.

> [implicit-capabilities]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md#updates

Reviewer: ### Summary

You'll want to figure out how to handle at least some of implicit-enablement, to avoid dropping `DeploymentConfig` in clusters updating into [OCPSTRAT-1465][3].

### Details

It's taken us a while to get real-world examples, but 4.18's [`OperatorLifecycleManagerV1`][1] is the first capability born out of the blue (for GA clusters).  The functionality was tech-preview in 4.17.  So a GA 4.17 cluster updating to 4.18 with [the `None` capability set][2] would have not had the `OperatorLifecycleManagerV1` capability enabled.  You don't currently allow anything like a `None` capability set, so this case isn't relevant for you yet.

But the other case, where a capability is removed from `vCurrent`, is relevant.  We're expecting [`DeploymentConfig` to be dropped soon][3] (say in 4.20, just to simplify discussion, but that's not a commitment, I'm not sure if or when it will actually happen).  Clusters updating from 4.19 to 4.20 in `vCurrent` will implicitly enable the capability.  If you leave the cluster in `vCurrent` without implicitly enabling the capability, the OpenShift API server says "hmm, I guess I reject this DeploymentConfig API request..." and all the DeploymentConfig-based Pods in the cluster get garbage collected, or something.  Which would probably upset the workload admins who'd been using DeploymentConfigs pre-update.
* You could maybe narrowly dance around it by unioning ClusterVersion's `status.capabilities.enabledCapabilities` with the `vCurrent - disabledCapabilities` set, but that would be feeding hosted-cluster-side ClusterVersion `status` back into management-cluster-side HostedControlPlane controler activities, which we try to avoid.
* The CVO avoids that kind of feedback loop at update-time by holding both the outgoing and incoming manifest sets in memory at once, and comparing them to see which capabilities need enabling.  But the CVO is still pulling ClusterVersion `status.capabilities.enabledCapabilities` back into its control loop during CVO-container-restart, because we don't have an alternative location to store that state.
* Another possible workaround would be to grow the `enabledCapabilities` property you float now, in this initial phase, and then you can hard-code logic like "when a cluster updates from 4.19, always add `DeploymentConfig` to `enabledCapabilities`" to the 4.20 HostedControlPlane controller.  Or other permutations of that kind of hard-coding, which is tedious to maintain, but possibly less brittle than relying on the preservation of `status` properties.

Aside from moving whole capabilities like that, the current CVO code handles cases like:

1. There was a component built into OCP, without an associated ClusterVersion capability knob in 4.y.
2. The component maintainers try to create a new ClusterVersion capability for their component in 4.(y+1).
3. But they missed a manifest!  The PrometheusRule gets the capability annotation in 4.(y+2).

Folks with the capability disabled on 4.(y+1) will have it implicitly enabled upon updating to 4.(y+2), because we don't support having a half-enabled capability.  This situation doesn't come up that often, but it [has happened][4].  If you're willing to have the occasional cluster ambiguously running a partial capability, you can probably ignore it.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/c1a063b1614ac3ccb0fc5ab49ba6158dfe8e3d3e/config/v1/types_cluster_version.go#L377
[2]: https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/c1a063b1614ac3ccb0fc5ab49ba6158dfe8e3d3e/config/v1/types_cluster_version.go#L429-L431
[3]: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPSTRAT-1465
[4]: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OTA-1039

> [implicit-capabilities]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md#updates

Author: Thank you both for your thoughtful answers.

> The functionality was tech-preview in 4.17. So a GA 4.17 cluster updating to 4.18 with [the None capability set](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/c1a063b1614ac3ccb0fc5ab49ba6158dfe8e3d3e/config/v1/types_cluster_version.go#L429-L431) would have not had the OperatorLifecycleManagerV1 capability enabled. You don't currently allow anything like a None capability set, so this case isn't relevant for you yet.

This EP proposes we start setting `BaselineCapabilitySet` to None, so this would become relevant...

> Clusters updating from 4.19 to 4.20 in vCurrent will implicitly enable the capability. If you leave the cluster in vCurrent without implicitly enabling the capability, the OpenShift API server says "hmm, I guess I reject this DeploymentConfig API request..." and all the DeploymentConfig-based Pods in the cluster get garbage collected, or something.

Given that CVO in Hypershift (as well as Hypershift itself) currently don't handle implicitly enabled capabilities, doesn't it mean that we would already be in the state you describe if the DeploymentConfig capability gets removed from `vCurrent` today, even without the changes proposed in this EP?

---

I'm still processing the suggestions, will probably have more questions once I have fully digested each.

> [implicit-capabilities]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md#updates

Reviewer: > Given that CVO in Hypershift (as well as Hypershift itself) currently don't handle implicitly enabled capabilities, doesn't it mean that we would already be in the state you describe if the DeploymentConfig capability gets removed from `vCurrent` today, even without the changes proposed in this EP?

Yikes, you're right!  I've warned the workloads folks [here][1] and [here][2].

[1]: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/WRKLDS-1326?focusedId=26401199&page=com.atlassian.jira.plugin.system.issuetabpanels:comment-tabpanel#comment-26401199
[2]: https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1954#issuecomment-2591592688

> [implicit-capabilities]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md#updates

Author: I've added a section about this under `Risks and Mitigations`: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1729/files#diff-36fbf863a674d8de905f7aa65cdb6158ec8c27b70d2fe5eed4272ca0a964a730R233

I'm still uncertain about what the correct approach here is. Would be great if you could give us your input @deads2k.

> [implicit-capabilities]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md#updates

Reviewer: Just wiring threads together, David's response seems to be [over here][1].

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1729#discussion_r1916925066

can grow to support a comma separated list of cluster capabilities.

### Workflow Description

1. Cluster service consumer creates a hosted cluster via `hypershift` CLI, setting
`--disable-cluster-capabilities=ImageRegistry`
1. The `hypershift` CLI creates a `HostedCluster` resource, setting
`.spec.disabledCapabilities` to `["ImageRegistry"]` as requested by the user
1. Hypershift control-plane-operator detects the ImageRegistry capability is
disabled in the `HostedCluster`, and skips creating resources for the Image
Registry operator, ensuring the `ClusterVersion` resource reflects this
1. The guest cluster becomes available and functional without the image registry
1. The hosted control-plane becomes available and functional without the
cluster image registry operator running
1. Image Registry operator and operand resources are not present in guest or
management clusters
1. Image Registry infrastructure resources are not created in cloud provider
(i.e. storage bucket, IAM user, etc)
1. No pull-secrets are created for any service accounts, regardless of when
the service account is created (install time or runtime)

### API Extensions

> ```go

Reviewer 2: fyi, I've already created the API changes in https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/pull/5415

of the disabled optional capabilities they want to re-enable at cluster install
time. In this case, a `--enabled-capability` flag may be added to the Hypershift
CLI, and an equivalent `EnabledCapabilities` added to the `HostedCluster`
resource.

When extending the list of supported capabilities in Hypershift, it is crucial
to use existing capability names from the CVO API. Standalone cluster
capability names should exactly match the ones supported by Hypershift, although
the set of supported capabilities is expected to differ.

#### Re-enabling components

When the cluster service consumer re-enables the `ImageRegistry` capability on a
running cluster, the CVO will provision the resources for the cluster-image-registry-operator,
resulting in new pods in the management cluster. Additionally, the pull secrets
controller (currently located in the openshift-controller-manager) will also be
enabled by Hypershift, causing a pod redeployment.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Lack of implicitly enabled capabilities

During hosted control plane upgrades, the CVO is currently unaware it's being
upgraded. This leads to the CVO being unable to calculate what capabilities

> should be implicitly enabled for clusters during upgrades.

Reviewer 4: is this simply a matter of including the information about capabilities in a manifest in the payload for consumption by the CVO?  We do something similar for featuregates today.

Reviewer: No, implicit capabilities depend on [the past state of the cluster][1] compared with the current target release.  We already have all the information we need about the current target release.  And we can't bake the past state of the cluster (which is cluster-specific) into release images.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/component-selection.md#updates

Author: Summarizing yesterday's chat here: while we agree that implicitly enabled capabilities is something that needs to be solved in Hypershift, specially when existing capabilities stop being enabled by default, it's not something we're going to cover in this EP, as the changes proposed here do not introduce new problems or exacerbate the existing issues.

I'll update the EP to reflect this.

Lack of implicitly enabled capabilities support results in two issues:

* when a capability is removed from the `vCurrent` capability set, hosted
control planes upgrading to the new `vCurrent` would lose the removed
capability, potentially disrupting customers' workloads
* when setting `BaselineCapabilitySet` in the `ClusterVersion` to `None`
(`ClusterVersionCapabilitySetNone`), newly introduced capabilities would be not
be added to the list of `AdditionalEnabledCapabilities`

The problem with removing capabilities from `vCurrent` was unearthed during
reviews of this EP, but it's not introduced by the changes proposed here. See
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OTA-823 for details about functional CVO
differences in Hypershift.

The issue with setting `BaselineCapabilitySet` to `None` however would be a
direct consequence of this EP.

The way to mitigate both issues without creating technical debt would be to

> allow the CVO to manage its own deployment. This

Reviewer: nit: Drop the dangling "This"?

resulting set to field `spec.capabilities.additionalEnabledCapabilities`.

The hosted cluster config operator will skip creation of Image Registry related
resources when it detects the image registry capability has been disabled.

#### Once disabled, capabilities cannot be enabled on running clusters

There is no use case for enabling an initially disabled capability on a running
cluster. For now, this will be a one way trip.

This will be ensured by API level validation of field immutability.

#### Capabilities cannot be disabled on running clusters

In hopes of disabling capabilities on a running cluster, cluster service
consumers may add or edit entries to `.spec.capabilities.disabledCapabilities`.
This will not pass validation, as this field is immutable.

#### Cluster upgrades

During cluster upgrades, the default set of capabilities might change. To avoid
drifting from the defaults imposed in OCP, the control-plane-operator will
always reconcile the default set of capabilities (vCurrent) with the
`ClusterVersion` `.spec.capabilities` field, minus the capabilities the user
initially disabled at cluster install time.

#### Evolving the Hypershift capabilities API

> 

Reviewer 5: in HCP the "baremetal" capability should be disable by default so clusters are install with out the CBO.
This makes a use case to capture capabilities opt-in semantic. A possible path forward:

```
type Capabilities struct {
	// disabledCapabilities when specified, sets the cluster version baselineCapabilitySet to None
	// and sets all additionalEnabledCapabilities BUT the ones supplied in disabledCapabilities.
	// This effectively disables that capability on the hosted cluster.
	//
	// When this is not supplied, the cluster will use the DefaultCapabilitySet defined for the respective
	// OpenShift version.
	//
	// Once set, this field cannot be changed.
	//
	// +listType=atomic
	// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self == oldSelf",message="disabledCapabilities is immutable"
	// +optional
	DisabledCapabilities []OptionalCapability `json:"disabledCapabilities,omitempty"`

	// enabledCapabilities specifies opt-in for capabilities that are not enable by default.
	// Its values are mutually exclusive with thouse in disabledCapabilities.
	EnabledCapabilities
...
}
```

Author: Thanks for the example, @enxebre ! I updated this section to reflect this.

---

# Disable the Image Registry via Capability

## Summary

In OCP Classic it's possible to disable various optional components at install
time via [cluster capabilities][cluster-capabilities]. This enhancement proposes
introducing a capabilities API to Hypershift, with initial support for a single
capability for disabling the `ImageRegistry`.

[cluster-capabilities]: /enhancements/installer/component-selection.md

## Motivation

It is currently possible to disable the Image Registry by setting
`.spec.managementState` to `Removed` in the `configs.imageregistry.operator.openshift.io`
resource. Using this approach to disable the Image Registry has the undesired
side-effect of causing a pod redeployment in the hosted control plane. This is
because the pull-secrets controller must be disabled along with the Image
Registry, and for that a pod redeployment is necessary.

We propose a way to disable the Image Registry that conforms to
[Hypershift's design principles][hypershift-design-principles].

Introducing a capabilities API to Hypershift is the natural way of supporting
disabling optional components at install time. To constrain the scope of the

> inital implementation, the `ImageRegistry` capability is the only one that will

Reviewer 6: typo `inital`

Author: thanks! fixed.
